DX-2218: Docs: Add documentation for Gateway readiness and liveness probes (#1460)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: planning-for-production/ensure-high-availability/health-check.mdx

---
title: "Liveness and Readiness Health Check Endpoints"
description: "How to set up liveness and readiness health checks for Tyk components to ensure high availability and monitor status."
sidebarTitle: "Health Checks"
---

## Availability

| Edition | Deployment Type |
| :------------- | :---------------------- |
| Community & Enterprise | Self-Managed, Hybrid |

Health checks verify the status of Tyk components (Gateway, Dashboard, Pump) and determine whether they are ready to process traffic or are simply running in an unresponsive or idle state.

### Use cases

- **Load Balancer Configuration**: Route traffic only to healthy instances.
- **Kubernetes Probes**: Automatically restart unhealthy pods or remove them from service.
- **Monitoring and Alerting**: Track the status of Tyk components and their dependencies (like Redis, RPC).

## Health Check Endpoints

Tyk provides two distinct HTTP endpoints for health checks:

- **Liveness Probe (`/hello` or `/health`)**: Indicates if the Tyk process is running and its web server is responsive. It returns HTTP 200 OK as long as the process is alive, regardless of dependency status like Redis.

> - **Readiness Probe (`/ready`)**: <Badge color="orange">Gateway Only</Badge> Indicates if the Gateway is fully initialized and ready to process traffic. It returns a non-200 status code (e.g., 503 Service Unavailable) if critical dependencies are not available. The Gateway is considered "ready" only when it's dependencies are healthy and the API definitions are loaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Readiness Probe (`/ready`)**: <Badge color="orange">Gateway Only</Badge> Indicates if the Gateway is fully initialized and ready to process traffic. It returns a non-200 status code (e.g., 503 Service Unavailable) if critical dependencies are not available. The Gateway is considered "ready" only when its dependencies are healthy and the API definitions are loaded.
```

<Note>
Health check is implemented as per the [Health Check Response Format for HTTP APIs](https://inadarei.github.io/rfc-healthcheck/) RFC.
</Note>

### Available Endpoints

| Component | Liveness Endpoint | Readiness Endpoint | Configuration Key | Introduced In |
|-----------|-------------------|--------------------|-------------------|---------------|

> | **Gateway** | `/hello` | `/ready` | [health_check_endpoint_name](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#health_check_endpoint_name) / [readiness_check_endpoint_name](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#readiness_check_endpoint_name) | Liveness: v2.7.5<br/>Readiness: v5.8.3+, v5.9.0+ |

Reviewer: We can probably just say that Readiness was available from v5.8.3 onwards, given that v5.9.0 onwards is included in that range.

> | **Dashboard** | `/hello` | N/A | [`health_check_endpoint_name`](/tyk-dashboard/configuration#health_check_endpoint_name) | - |

Reviewer: Don't we have an availability date for this? Probably the same as for Gateway?

Reviewer 2: Yes, it is v3.0.0. Updating the PR

| **Pump** | `/health` | N/A | [`health_check_endpoint_name`](/tyk-pump/tyk-pump-configuration/tyk-pump-environment-variables#health_check_endpoint_name) | Liveness: v2.9.4 |

For more details on configuring these endpoints, refer to the configuration references for [Gateway](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration), [Dashboard](/tyk-dashboard/configuration), and [Pump](/tyk-pump/tyk-pump-configuration/tyk-pump-environment-variables).

> ### Status Levels

Reviewer: I don't think this is very clear.

It mentions "the JSON response" - is this format the same for all four endpoints mentioned in the table above?

This section might be better written as a description of the response received from the endpoints - so the "status levels" title is unclear.

I feel it needs some text to explain the response(s)... and then explanation of the `status` and other elements of that response.

Reviewer 2: Yes, you are correct. These status values apply only to Gateway. I have restructured the page.

The following status levels can be returned in the JSON response:

> - **pass**: Indicates that all components required for the component to work 100% are available, and there is no impact on your traffic.

Reviewer: This reads as if it relates only to Gateway, as it mentions traffic.

Reviewer 2: Yes, you are correct. These status values apply only to Gateway. I have restructured the page.

> - **warn**: Indicates that one of the components is having an outage but your component is able to keep processing traffic. The impact is medium (i.e. no quotas are applied, no analytics, no RPC connection to [MDCB](/api-management/mdcb)).

Reviewer: Only the Gateway processes traffic.

> - **fail**: Indicates that critical dependencies (e.g., Redis AND the Tyk Dashboard) are unavailable, and can indicate other failures. The impact is high (i.e. no configuration changes are available for API/policies/keys, no quotas are applied, and no analytics).

Reviewer: Again, this is written as if it applies only to Gateway - is this the response from `/ready`?

Reviewer 2: Yes, you are correct. These status values apply only to Gateway. I have restructured the page.

## Configuration

By default, the liveness health check runs on `/hello` but can be configured to any path. For example:

```yaml
health_check_endpoint_name: "status"
```

This configures the health check to run on `/status` instead of `/hello`.

Similarly, you can customize the readiness endpoint:

```yaml
readiness_check_endpoint_name: "is-ready"
```

**Refresh Interval**

> The health check endpoint refreshes every 10 seconds.

Reviewer: Not sure why this is in configuration - as it's not configurable perhaps this should be mentioned above, in the description/explanation of the functionality?

Reviewer 2: Moved to the explantaion section

For more details on configuring these endpoints, refer to the configuration references for [Gateway](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration), [Dashboard](/tyk-dashboard/configuration), and [Pump](/tyk-pump/tyk-pump-configuration/tyk-pump-environment-variables).

> ## Kubernetes Probes Example

Reviewer: This feels more like "recommendations for deployment" rather than an example

Reviewer 2: I have restructured this section.

*   **Liveness Probe MUST use `/hello`**: Ensures Kubernetes restarts a pod only if the Gateway process has crashed or frozen.
*   **Readiness Probe SHOULD use `/ready`**: Ensures a Gateway pod receives traffic only when fully connected to dependencies and configurations are loaded.

> Here is an example:

Reviewer: Is this example config specific to Kubernetes? Why not provide the example config for both k8s and non-k8s environments (i.e. in the Tyk config file(s) vs the Operator setup)?

Reviewer 2: Done

```yaml
gateway:
  livenessProbe:
    httpGet:
      path: /hello
      port: 8080 # Adjust to your gateway's listen port
    initialDelaySeconds: 10
    periodSeconds: 10
    timeoutSeconds: 5
    failureThreshold: 3
  readinessProbe:
    httpGet:
      path: /ready # Use the stricter /ready endpoint
      port: 8080 # Adjust to your gateway's listen port
    initialDelaySeconds: 15 # Give more time for API loading
    periodSeconds: 10
    timeoutSeconds: 5
    failureThreshold: 3
```

<Note>
Adjust `initialDelaySeconds` based on the number of APIs your Gateway loads and available pod resources.
</Note>

## Health check examples

> The following examples show how the Health check endpoint returns for the Gateway.

Reviewer: I would cross-link this to the explanation further up the page (which, per my comments doesn't seem to state that it's specific to the GW endpoints)

---
title: "Liveness and Readiness Health Check Endpoints"
description: "How to set up liveness and readiness health checks for Tyk components to ensure high availability and monitor status."
sidebarTitle: "Health Checks"
---

## Availability

| Edition | Deployment Type |
| :------------- | :---------------------- |
| Community & Enterprise | Self-Managed, Hybrid |

Health checks verify the status of Tyk components (Gateway, Dashboard, Pump) and determine whether they are ready to process traffic or are simply running in an unresponsive or idle state.

### Use cases

- **Load Balancer Configuration**: Route traffic only to healthy instances.
- **Kubernetes Probes**: Automatically restart unhealthy pods or remove them from service.
- **Monitoring and Alerting**: Track the status of Tyk components and their dependencies (like Redis, RPC).

## Health Check Endpoints

Tyk provides two distinct HTTP endpoints for health checks:

> - **Liveness Probe (`/hello` or `/health`)**: Indicates if the Tyk process is running and its web server is responsive. It returns HTTP 200 OK as long as the process is alive, regardless of dependency status like Redis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Liveness Probe (`/hello` or `/health`)**: Indicates if the Tyk process is running and its web server is responsive. It returns `200 OK` if the process is alive, regardless of the status of any dependency such as a Redis datastore.
```

> - **Readiness Probe (`/ready`)**: <Badge color="orange">Gateway Only</Badge> Indicates if the Gateway is fully initialized and ready to process traffic. It returns a non-200 status code (e.g., 503 Service Unavailable) if critical dependencies are not available. The Gateway is considered "ready" only when its dependencies are healthy and the API definitions are loaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Readiness Probe (`/ready`)**: <Badge color="orange">Gateway Only</Badge> Indicates whether the Gateway is fully initialized and ready to process traffic. It returns a non-200 status code (e.g., `503 Service Unavailable`) if critical dependencies are not available. The Gateway is considered "ready" only when its dependencies are healthy and the API definitions are loaded.

```

<Note>

> Health check is implemented as per the [Health Check Response Format for HTTP APIs](https://inadarei.github.io/rfc-healthcheck/) RFC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Health check is implemented in accordance with the [Health Check Response Format for HTTP APIs](https://inadarei.github.io/rfc-healthcheck/) RFC.
```

Reviewer: @sharadregoti do we mean Liveness Probe here?

</Note>

> ### Available Endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Data accuracy

The Gateway's health is sampled and cached every 10 seconds for both liveness and readiness endpoints.

The Dashboard and Pump liveness endpoints return the live status of the component. 

### Probe Endpoints

The Liveness and Readiness endpoints for each component are summarised here. Tyk provides the option to [customise](#customising-the-endpoint-path) the endpoint paths if required for your integration.

```

| Component | Liveness Endpoint | Readiness Endpoint | Configuration Key | Introduced In |
|-----------|-------------------|--------------------|-------------------|---------------|

> | **Gateway** | `/hello` | `/ready` | [health_check_endpoint_name](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#health_check_endpoint_name) / [readiness_check_endpoint_name](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#readiness_check_endpoint_name) | Liveness: v2.7.5<br/>Readiness: v5.8.3+ |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Gateway** | `/hello` | `/ready` | [health_check_endpoint_name](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#health_check_endpoint_name) / [readiness_check_endpoint_name](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#readiness_check_endpoint_name) | Liveness: v2.7.5<br/>Readiness: v5.8.3 |
```

| **Dashboard** | `/health` | N/A | [`health_check_endpoint_name`](/tyk-dashboard/configuration#health_check_endpoint_name) | v3.0.0 |

> | **Pump** | `/health` | N/A | [`health_check_endpoint_name`](/tyk-pump/tyk-pump-configuration/tyk-pump-environment-variables#health_check_endpoint_name) | Liveness: v2.9.4 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Pump** | `/health` | N/A | [`health_check_endpoint_name`](/tyk-pump/tyk-pump-configuration/tyk-pump-environment-variables#health_check_endpoint_name) | Pump v0.8.5 |
```

Reviewer: The latest Pump version is 1.14.1.... I don't think this was introduced in v2.9.4! Also, according to the config docs, the default is `/hello`. Can we please verify these details?

> The default endpoint paths can be changed via the `health_check_endpoint_name` config key (all components) and `readiness_check_endpoint_name` (Gateway only). For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Customising the endpoint path

For some integrations, the default endpoint paths are not suitable, so Tyk provides a simple method to customise them as required.

Simply set the required endpoint name using the configuration key for the appropriate probe endpoint:

- **Liveness probe**: `health_check_endpoint_name` (all components)
- **Readiness probe**:`readiness_check_endpoint_name` (Gateway only)

The equivalent environment variables can be used in place of the config files, for example the Gateway configs are:

```bash
TYK_GW_HEALTHCHECKENDPOINTNAME=status
TYK_GW_READINESSCHECKENDPOINTNAME=is-ready
```

For example to change the liveness probe endpoint for the Pump to `/status` you would set the following in your Pump config:
```

```yaml
health_check_endpoint_name: "status"
```

> This changes the liveness endpoint to `/status`. For full details, refer to the [Gateway](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration), [Dashboard](/tyk-dashboard/configuration), and [Pump](/tyk-pump/tyk-pump-configuration/tyk-pump-environment-variables) configuration references.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't think this adds any value - the links are in the table, and those pages do not have any additional clarifying detail at this time.

### Response Format

> #### Gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Tyk Gateway
```

> The Gateway's `/hello` and `/ready` endpoints return a structured JSON response. Health status is cached and refreshed every 10 seconds. Both endpoints reflect the most recent snapshot:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Gateway's `/hello` and `/ready` endpoints return a structured JSON response. Both endpoints reflect the [most recently cached](#data-accuracy) status:
```

```json
{
  "status": "pass",
  "version": "v5.8.10",
  "description": "Tyk GW",
  "details": {
    "redis": { "status": "pass", "componentType": "datastore", "time": "..." }
  }
}
```

The `status` field can have the following values:

| Status | HTTP Code | Description |
|--------|-----------|-------------|
| **pass** | 200 | All dependencies available. No impact on traffic. |
| **warn** | 200 | One dependency is down but Gateway continues processing. Medium impact (no quotas, no analytics, no RPC connection to [MDCB](/api-management/mdcb)). |

> | **fail** | 200 (`/hello`) / 503 (`/ready`) | Critical dependencies (Redis and/or the Tyk Dashboard) unavailable. High impact (no configuration changes, no quotas, no analytics). |

Reviewer: For an MDCB deployment, Tyk Dashboard isn't available if MDCB is unavailable... does this mean "Tyk Dashboard isn't available in a non-MDCB deployment"?

We actually have multiple `status` fields in this response: one for the component and one per entry in `details`. I take it that `details` is a list of all dependencies for this component?

I feel we should explain each entry in the given example response for complete clarity.

> #### Dashboard, Pump

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Tyk Dashboard and Tyk Pump
```

> Both return a simple live response with no caching:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both return the [live status](#data-accuracy) of the component, with no caching:
```

```json
{"status": "ok"}
```

HTTP 200 is returned when the service is running.

## Deployment Configuration

### Non-Kubernetes

> Point your load balancer or external monitoring system at `/hello` to check Gateway health. The endpoint names can also be set via environment variables instead of the config file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Point your load balancer or external monitoring system at the Gateway's liveness endpoint (default: `/hello`) to check that the Gateway is up. You can use the readiness endpoint (default: `/ready`) to check that it is ready to handle API client requests.
```

> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> TYK_GW_HEALTHCHECKENDPOINTNAME=status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> TYK_GW_READINESSCHECKENDPOINTNAME=is-ready

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Kubernetes (Helm)

When deploying Tyk Gateway on Kubernetes, use `/hello` for the liveness probe and `/ready` for the readiness probe. Configure them via `gateway.livenessProbe` and `gateway.readinessProbe` in your Helm `values.yaml`:

```yaml
gateway:
  livenessProbe:
    httpGet:
      path: /hello
      port: 8080
    initialDelaySeconds: 10
    periodSeconds: 10
    timeoutSeconds: 5
    failureThreshold: 3
  readinessProbe:
    httpGet:
      path: /ready
      port: 8080
    initialDelaySeconds: 15
    periodSeconds: 10
    timeoutSeconds: 5
    failureThreshold: 3
```

<Note>

> Adjust `initialDelaySeconds` based on the number of APIs your Gateway loads and available pod resources. If using the Tyk Operator, probe configuration is still done at the Helm level; the Operator manages API definitions and policies, not the Gateway deployment itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adjust `initialDelaySeconds` based on the number of APIs your Gateway loads and available pod resources to allow time for it to be ready to serve requests. Note that if you are using the Tyk Operator, probe configuration is still done at the Helm level: the Operator manages API definitions and policies, not the Gateway deployment itself.
```

</Note>

> ## Health check examples

Reviewer: These examples need to be replaced with structured, well documented examples with clear explanations of the scenario and how to interpret the response. It needs to be very clear how they differ between readiness and liveness probe responses.
